Enhancement: Detect inefficiencies in SIM jobs with CPMIPS thresholds - Part 5 (Final) (#3018)
BSC-ES/autosubmit: docs/source/userguide/configure/index.rst

                - FAILED
                - COMPLETED

> .. _cpmip-notifications-config:

Reviewer: What exactly is this directive? Do you need to have it set in here?

Author: It is an anchor for referencing from the performance page

How to configure CPMIP threshold notifications
----------------------------------------------

Autosubmit can send an email when one or more
:doc:`CPMIP performance metrics </userguide/performance/index>`
fall outside a target range. The feature reuses the same ``MAIL.NOTIFICATIONS``
and ``MAIL.TO`` settings as job-status notifications, so make sure those are
enabled first (see the previous section).

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Autosubmit can send email alerts when one or more :doc:`CPMIP performance metrics </userguide/performance/index>` 
fall outside the configured target range. This feature uses the same ``MAIL.NOTIFICATIONS`` and ``MAIL.TO`` 
settings as job-status notifications, so make sure those are enabled first (see the previous section).

```

CPMIP metrics are designed for the **simulation job** (commonly named
``SIM``), which runs per chunk and exposes the calendar metadata (``CHUNK``,
``CHUNKSIZE``, ``CHUNKSIZEUNIT``) required to compute SYPD and CHSY. Declare
the ``CPMIP_THRESHOLDS`` block under that job in ``jobs_<EXPID>.yml``. Each

> entry maps a metric name (``SYPD``, ``CHSY``, ``CORE_HOURS``) to its target

Reviewer: ```suggestion
entry maps a metric named (``SYPD``, ``CHSY``, ``CORE_HOURS``) to its target
```

shape:

.. code-block:: yaml

    JOBS:
        SIM:
            RUNNING: chunk
            PROCESSORS: 256
            WALLCLOCK: 01:00
            CPMIP_THRESHOLDS:
                SYPD:
                    THRESHOLD: 5.0           # target SYPD
                    COMPARISON: greater_than # SYPD must be >= THRESHOLD
                    "%_ACCEPTED_ERROR": 10   # allow 10% slack below the threshold
                CHSY:
                    THRESHOLD: 50000
                    COMPARISON: less_than    # CHSY must be <= THRESHOLD
                    "%_ACCEPTED_ERROR": 5
                CORE_HOURS:
                    THRESHOLD: 1000
                    COMPARISON: less_than    # CORE_HOURS must be <= THRESHOLD
                    "%_ACCEPTED_ERROR": 5

The keys are:

> * ``THRESHOLD``: numeric target the metric is compared against. Must be > 0.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``THRESHOLD``: The numeric target value used for comparison against the metric. This value must be > 0.
```

* ``COMPARISON``: ``greater_than`` (metric must be ≥ threshold) or
  ``less_than`` (metric must be ≤ threshold).
* ``%_ACCEPTED_ERROR``: percentage slack applied to the threshold before
  flagging a violation. For ``greater_than`` the effective bound is
  ``THRESHOLD * (1 - error/100)``; for ``less_than``,

>   ``THRESHOLD * (1 + error/100)``. Use ``0`` for a strict check.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* ``%_ACCEPTED_ERROR``: Percentage slack applied to the threshold before flagging a violation. 
For ``greater_than``, the effective lower bound is ``THRESHOLD * (1 - error / 100)``; 
for ``less_than``, the effective upper bound is ``THRESHOLD * (1 + error / 100)``. 
Set to 0 to enforce a strict threshold check.
```

When the job completes, Autosubmit recomputes the configured metrics, applies

> the bound, and — if any metric is outside it — sends a single

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the bound, and — if any of the metrics are outside of it — sends a single
```

*"CPMIP Threshold Violation detected"* email to the recipients in
``MAIL.TO``. The body lists each violated metric with its configured
threshold, effective bound, and observed value.

Example notification
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

With the configuration above, suppose the simulation completes with
``SYPD = 3.9``, ``CHSY = 55000``, and ``CORE_HOURS = 1280``. All three fall
outside their effective bounds (SYPD ``≥ 4.5`` after the 10% slack;
CHSY ``≤ 52500`` after the 5% slack; CORE_HOURS ``≤ 1050`` after the 5%

> slack), so Autosubmit sends a single email looking like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With the configuration above, suppose the simulation completes with ``SYPD = 3.9``, ``CHSY = 55000``, and ``CORE_HOURS = 1280``. 
All three values fall outside their effective bounds (SYPD ``≥ 4.5`` after the 10% slack;
CHSY ``≤ 52500`` after the 5% slack; CORE_HOURS ``≤ 1050`` 
after the 5% slack), so Autosubmit sends a single email notification similar to the following:
```

    Experiment id:  a000

    Job name: a000_20200101_fc0_1_SIM

    The following CPMIP metrics violated their configured thresholds:

    ----------------------------------------
    Metric: CHSY
    ----------------------------------------
    Comparison: must be <= effective bound (less_than)
    Configured threshold: 50000.0
    Accepted error (%): 5.0
    Effective bound: 52500.0
    Observed value: 55000.0

    ----------------------------------------
    Metric: CORE_HOURS
    ----------------------------------------
    Comparison: must be <= effective bound (less_than)
    Configured threshold: 1000.0
    Accepted error (%): 5.0
    Effective bound: 1050.0
    Observed value: 1280.0

    ----------------------------------------
    Metric: SYPD
    ----------------------------------------
    Comparison: must be >= effective bound (greater_than)
    Configured threshold: 5.0
    Accepted error (%): 10.0
    Effective bound: 4.5
    Observed value: 3.9

    INFO: This message was auto generated by Autosubmit,
    remember that you can disable these messages on Autosubmit config file.

Metrics that pass their thresholds are omitted from the body, and no email is

> sent at all when every configured metric is within its effective bound.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Metrics that remain within their effective bounds are omitted from the email body.
If all configured metrics satisfy their thresholds, no notification email is sent.
```
